# Native CPVS Engine

This document explains how to build and exercise the experimental C port of the
principal variation search engine. The native binary focuses on drop-in UCI
compatibility with `main.py` and the existing benchmarking harness so that
performance comparisons against the Python implementation can be made without
changing the surrounding tooling.

## Building on a native machine

The repository ships with a minimal `Makefile` that targets `gcc`, but any C11
compiler should work. When you have access to a machine with a toolchain
available, run:

```bash
cd native
make
```

This produces an executable named `cpvsengine` next to the source. On Windows
the output will be `cpvsengine.exe`. Both files are ignored by git so you can
rebuild locally without polluting the working tree.

If you prefer an out-of-tree build, point `make` (or your own CMake/Ninja setup)
at `native/cpvsengine.c` and emit the executable into `native/build/`. The shim
described below looks for `native/cpvsengine`, `native/cpvsengine.exe`, and
`native/build/cpvsengine` in that order by default.

## Running via UCI

The binary speaks the same UCI dialect as `pvsengine.py`. You can test it
interactively:

```bash
./native/cpvsengine
uci
isready
position startpos
go movetime 200
```

The engine prints iterative deepening summaries followed by a `bestmove` line
and honours `stop`, `ucinewgame`, and `quit`. Time controls are interpreted in
milliseconds (`movetime`, `wtime`, `btime`, `winc`, `binc`), matching the
Python engine.

## Using the Python shim

`main.py` always launches engines as Python scripts. To slot the native binary
into either the GUI or the headless harness, point the engine entry to
`native/cpvsengine_shim.py`. The shim spawns the compiled executable and
forwards UCI traffic between the Python process and the native binary.

By default the shim expects to find `native/cpvsengine` (or `cpvsengine.exe` on
Windows). You can override the location by setting
`CPVSENGINE_NATIVE_PATH=/absolute/path/to/cpvsengine` or by invoking the shim
with `--engine-path /custom/build/cpvsengine`. This allows you to keep multiple
builds around (for instance, profile vs. release) without editing the launcher
code.

To verify the setup end-to-end:

```bash
python native/cpvsengine_shim.py
uci
isready
quit
```

When a build is present the shim will echo the binary's responses to stdout, so
`uci` should produce the engine's identification banner and supported option
list.

## Benchmarking against the Python engine

`benchmark_pvs.py` now includes a `compare` sub-command that drives both engines
through the same set of positions and search budgets. For example, to compare a
200 ms search window on the default curated scenarios:

```bash
python benchmark_pvs.py compare --movetime 200 --max-wait 5 \
    --native-cmd ./native/cpvsengine
```

The command prints per-position metrics (depth, elapsed time, nodes searched,
and principal variation) for each engine, along with aggregate averages and
Python/native ratios.

## Known gaps

The C engine mirrors the Python heuristics at a high level (piece-square tables,
simple quiescence search, history ordering, and transposition table with
principal variation search), but it remains a single-threaded baseline without
aspiration windows or sophisticated pruning. A few midgame positions currently
resolve immediately because the legality checks are stricter than the Python
engineâ€™s move generator, so the reported node counts can drop to zero when the
search recognises a forced mate at the root. Despite those limitations, the
binary provides a useful reference point for evaluating the raw overhead of the
Python implementation versus a native build.
